README.md, before:

# SonarQube Deployment on Minikube

This project provides a setup for deploying SonarQube Community Edition on Minikube using Kubernetes and Docker Compose.

# Disclaimer

I do not guarantee that this deployment is production ready. Actually, the deployment manifest is intentionally missing resource limits.

This is a setup suitable for testing SonarQube platform and start familiarizing with static code analizers.

## Prerequisites

- [Minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/)
- [Kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/)
- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/)
- [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/)

## Project Structure

```
docker-compose.yaml
postgresql.yaml
sonarqube.yaml
split/
    deployment.yaml
    ingress.yaml
    namespace.yaml
    service.yaml
    volume-claims.yaml
    volumes.yaml


```

## Setup Instructions

### Step 1: Start and configure Minikube

Start your Minikube cluster:

```sh
minikube start
```

If you did not already do so, enable the ingress addon: 
```sh
minikube addons enable ingress
```


### Step 2: Apply postgresql manifest
The provided `postgresql.yaml` creates a PostgreSQL database in a confined namespace. Once the database is up, connect to it and create a `sonar` database. 

### Step 3: Apply Kubernetes Manifests

Apply the single manifest `sonarqube.yaml` or use the manifests located in the `split` directory:
```sh
kubectl apply -f sonarqube.yaml
```

or 

```sh
kubectl apply -f namespace.yaml
kubectl apply -f volumes.yaml
kubectl apply -f volume-claims.yaml
kubectl apply -f service.yaml
kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
kubectl apply -f ingress.yaml

```
### Step 4: Access SonarQube

If you have installed `ingress-dns` as per [instructions](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/handbook/addons/ingress-dns), SonarQube is available at `http://sonarqube.test`' .

In case you do not want to use `ingress-dns` minikube addon, you can still access SonarQube by querying minikube active services.
If you have installed minikube `ingress` addon (strongly advised) try to issue 
```shell
minikube service list
```
You should end up with something like : 

```
|----------------------|------------------------------------|---------------------|---------------------------|
|      NAMESPACE       |                NAME                |     TARGET PORT     |            URL            |
|----------------------|------------------------------------|---------------------|---------------------------|
| default              | hello-world-app                    | http/80             | http://192.168.49.2:32207 |
| default              | kubernetes                         | No node port        |                           |
| ingress-nginx        | ingress-nginx-controller           | http/80             | http://192.168.49.2:31680 |
|                      |                                    | https/443           | http://192.168.49.2:30795 |
| ingress-nginx        | ingress-nginx-controller-admission | No node port        |                           |
| kube-system          | hello-world-app                    | No node port        |                           |
| kube-system          | kube-dns                           | No node port        |                           |
| kube-system          | metrics-server                     | No node port        |                           |
| kubernetes-dashboard | kubernetes-dashboard               | No node port        |                           |
| postgresql-db        | postgresql-db                      |                5432 | http://192.168.49.2:30042 |
| sonarqube            | sonarqube-service                  | sonar-internal/9000 | http://192.168.49.2:30090 |
|----------------------|------------------------------------|---------------------|---------------------------|

```
Please note: the ip in the `URL` column may change.
If you find the service `sonarqube-service`, you only need to open the corresponding `URL` and you're set.

Another option is to add an entry in /etc/hosts that's then being resolved by the ingress you deployed. If you havent' changed
the ingress, your sonarqube ingress will route traffic requests for `http://sonarqube.test`.
#### Issues with ingress-dns
The installation documentation for the ingress-dns addon does not always work. I myself had to bang my head on a wall for qyute some time in order to make systemd-resolved work with split dns, until I resolved to install a local dns (dnsmasq, in my case) ... and [that wasn't a piece of cake either](https://github.com/kubernetes/minikube/issues/18727#issuecomment-2432626834).
You should arm yourself with patience and be ready to fiddle with your system. You can find solutions to most of your problems by doing some smart Google search. As usual, when everything else fails, read the manuals.

```sh
echo "$(minikube ip) sonarqube.test" | sudo tee -a /etc/hosts
```
The latter will create an entry with the ip address of your minikube server resolving `sonarqube.test` to that ip.

## Configuration Details

### Kubernetes Manifests


The Kubernetes manifests in the `split` directory are there for ease of inspection and define the necessary resources for deploying SonarQube:

- `namespace.yaml`: Defines the `sonarqube` namespace.
- `volumes.yaml`: Defines the PersistentVolumes for SonarQube data, extensions, and logs.
- `volume-claims.yaml`: Defines the PersistentVolumeClaims for the volumes.
- `service.yaml`: Defines the SonarQube service.
- `deployment.yaml`: Defines the SonarQube deployment, including an init container for setting volume permissions.
- `ingress.yaml`: Defines the Ingress resource for accessing SonarQube.


## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Trademarks
- PostgreSQL is a registered trademark of the PostgreSQL Community Association of Canada.
- SonarQube is a registered trademark of SonarSource SA.
- Docker and Docker Compose are trademarks or registered trademarks of Docker, Inc.
- Kubernetes and Minikube are trademarks or registered trademarks of The Linux Foundation.
- Kubectl is a trademark of The Linux Foundation.

Commit message:

Added instructions to fiddle with error 413

README.md, after:

# SonarQube Deployment on Minikube

This project provides a setup for deploying SonarQube Community Edition on Minikube using Kubernetes and Docker Compose.

# Disclaimer

I do not guarantee that this deployment is production ready. Actually, the deployment manifest is intentionally missing resource limits.

This is a setup suitable for testing SonarQube platform and start familiarizing with static code analizers.

## Prerequisites

- [Minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/)
- [Kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/)
- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/)
- [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/)

## Project Structure

```
docker-compose.yaml
postgresql.yaml
sonarqube.yaml
split/
    deployment.yaml
    ingress.yaml
    namespace.yaml
    service.yaml
    volume-claims.yaml
    volumes.yaml


```

## Setup Instructions

### Step 1: Start and configure Minikube

Start your Minikube cluster:

```sh
minikube start
```

If you did not already do so, enable the ingress addon: 
```sh
minikube addons enable ingress
```


### Step 2: Apply postgresql manifest
The provided `postgresql.yaml` creates a PostgreSQL database in a confined namespace. Once the database is up, connect to it and create a `sonar` database. 

### Step 3: Apply Kubernetes Manifests

Apply the single manifest `sonarqube.yaml` or use the manifests located in the `split` directory:
```sh
kubectl apply -f sonarqube.yaml
```

or 

```sh
kubectl apply -f namespace.yaml
kubectl apply -f volumes.yaml
kubectl apply -f volume-claims.yaml
kubectl apply -f service.yaml
kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
kubectl apply -f ingress.yaml

```
### Step 4: Access SonarQube

If you have installed `ingress-dns` as per [instructions](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/handbook/addons/ingress-dns), SonarQube is available at `http://sonarqube.test`' .

In case you do not want to use `ingress-dns` minikube addon, you can still access SonarQube by querying minikube active services.
If you have installed minikube `ingress` addon (strongly advised) try to issue 
```shell
minikube service list
```
You should end up with something like : 

```
|----------------------|------------------------------------|---------------------|---------------------------|
|      NAMESPACE       |                NAME                |     TARGET PORT     |            URL            |
|----------------------|------------------------------------|---------------------|---------------------------|
| default              | hello-world-app                    | http/80             | http://192.168.49.2:32207 |
| default              | kubernetes                         | No node port        |                           |
| ingress-nginx        | ingress-nginx-controller           | http/80             | http://192.168.49.2:31680 |
|                      |                                    | https/443           | http://192.168.49.2:30795 |
| ingress-nginx        | ingress-nginx-controller-admission | No node port        |                           |
| kube-system          | hello-world-app                    | No node port        |                           |
| kube-system          | kube-dns                           | No node port        |                           |
| kube-system          | metrics-server                     | No node port        |                           |
| kubernetes-dashboard | kubernetes-dashboard               | No node port        |                           |
| postgresql-db        | postgresql-db                      |                5432 | http://192.168.49.2:30042 |
| sonarqube            | sonarqube-service                  | sonar-internal/9000 | http://192.168.49.2:30090 |
|----------------------|------------------------------------|---------------------|---------------------------|

```
Please note: the ip in the `URL` column may change.
If you find the service `sonarqube-service`, you only need to open the corresponding `URL` and you're set.

Another option is to add an entry in /etc/hosts that's then being resolved by the ingress you deployed. If you havent' changed
the ingress, your sonarqube ingress will route traffic requests for `http://sonarqube.test`.
#### Issues with ingress-dns
The installation documentation for the ingress-dns addon does not always work. I myself had to bang my head on a wall for qyute some time in order to make systemd-resolved work with split dns, until I resolved to install a local dns (dnsmasq, in my case) ... and [that wasn't a piece of cake either](https://github.com/kubernetes/minikube/issues/18727#issuecomment-2432626834).
You should arm yourself with patience and be ready to fiddle with your system. You can find solutions to most of your problems by doing some smart Google search. As usual, when everything else fails, read the manuals.

```sh
echo "$(minikube ip) sonarqube.test" | sudo tee -a /etc/hosts
```
The latter will create an entry with the ip address of your minikube server resolving `sonarqube.test` to that ip.

## Configuration Details

### Kubernetes Manifests


The Kubernetes manifests in the `split` directory are there for ease of inspection and define the necessary resources for deploying SonarQube:

- `namespace.yaml`: Defines the `sonarqube` namespace.
- `volumes.yaml`: Defines the PersistentVolumes for SonarQube data, extensions, and logs.
- `volume-claims.yaml`: Defines the PersistentVolumeClaims for the volumes.
- `service.yaml`: Defines the SonarQube service.
- `deployment.yaml`: Defines the SonarQube deployment, including an init container for setting volume permissions.
- `ingress.yaml`: Defines the Ingress resource for accessing SonarQube.

### Request entity size
In case you get an error 413 `running mvn sonar:sonar ...` of the kind : 
```
[ERROR] <head><title>413 Request Entity Too Large</title></head>
[ERROR] <body>
[ERROR] <center><h1>413 Request Entity Too Large</h1></center>
[ERROR] <hr><center>nginx</center>
[ERROR] </body>
[ERROR] </html>
```

change the ingress stanza/file and add an annotation like so : 
```yaml
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
  namespace: sonarqube
  name: sonarqube-ingress
  annotations:                                         #<- add this line
    nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/proxy-body-size: "50m" #<- add this line. Adjust the size
```
## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Trademarks
- PostgreSQL is a registered trademark of the PostgreSQL Community Association of Canada.
- SonarQube is a registered trademark of SonarSource SA.
- Docker and Docker Compose are trademarks or registered trademarks of Docker, Inc.
- Kubernetes and Minikube are trademarks or registered trademarks of The Linux Foundation.
- Kubectl is a trademark of The Linux Foundation.
